Replace Details of the object model with Using classes guide (#18542)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/javascript/guide/using_classes/index.md

  // Class body. Here MyClass and MyClassLongerName point to the same class.
};
new MyClassLongerName(); // ReferenceError: MyClassLongerName is not defined
```

## Constructor

Perhaps the most important job of a class is to act as a "factory" for objects. For example, when we use the `Date` constructor, we expect it to give a new object which represents the date data we passed in — which we can then manipulate with other methods the instance exposes. In classes, the instance creation is done by the [constructor](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/constructor).

As an example, we would create a class called `Color`, which represents a specific color. Users create colors through passing in an [RGB](/en-US/docs/Glossary/RGB) triplet.

```js
class Color {
  constructor(r, g, b) {
    // Assign the RGB values as a property of `this`.
    this.values = [r, g, b];
  }
}
```

Open your browser's DevTools, paste the above code into the console, and then create an instance:

```js
const red = new Color(255, 0, 0);
console.log(red);
```

You should see some output like this:

```
Object { values: (3) […] }
  values: Array(3) [ 255, 0, 0 ]
```

> You have successfully created a `Color` instance, and the instance has a `values` property, which is an array of the RGB values you passed in. This is pretty much equivalent to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have successfully created a `Color` instance, and the instance has a `values` property, which is an array of the RGB values you passed in. That is pretty much equivalent to the following:
```

```js
function createColor(r, g, b) {
  return {
    values: [r, g, b],
  };
}
```

> The constructor's syntax is exactly the same as a normal function, so you can use other syntaxes, like [rest parameters](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/rest_parameters):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The constructor's syntax is exactly the same as a normal function — so you can use other syntaxes, like [rest parameters](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/rest_parameters):
```

```js
class Color {
  constructor(...values) {
    this.values = values;
  }
}

const red = new Color(255, 0, 0);
// Creates an instance with the same shape as above.
```

Each time you call `new`, a different instance is created.

```js
const red = new Color(255, 0, 0);
const anotherRed = new Color(255, 0, 0);
console.log(red === anotherRed); // false
```

Within a class constructor, the value of `this` points to the newly created instance. You can assign properties to it, or read existing properties (especially methods — which we will cover next).

The `this` value will be automatically returned as the result of `new`. You are advised to not return any value from the constructor — because if you return a non-primitive value, it will become the value of the `new` expression, and the value of `this` is dropped. (You can read more about what `new` does in [its description](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/new#description).)

```js
class MyClass {
  constructor() {
    this.myField = "foo";
    return {};
  }
}

console.log(new MyClass().myField); // undefined
```

## Instance methods

> If a class only has a constructor, it is not much different from a `createX` factory function which just creates plain objects. However, the power of classes is that it can be used as a "template" which automatically assigns methods to instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a class only has a constructor, it is not much different from a `createX` factory function which just creates plain objects. However, the power of classes is that they can be used as "templates" which automatically assign methods to instances.
```

> For example, for `Date` instances, you can use a range of methods to get different information from a single date value, like the [year](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/getFullYear), [month](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/getMonth), [day of the week](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/getDay), etc. You can also set those values through the `setX` counterparts like [`setFullYear`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/setFullYear).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, for `Date` instances, you can use a range of methods to get different information from a single date value, such as the [year](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/getFullYear), [month](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/getMonth), [day of the week](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/getDay), etc. You can also set those values through the `setX` counterparts like [`setFullYear`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/setFullYear).
```

For our own `Color` class, we can add a method called `getRed` which returns the red value of the color.

```js
class Color {
  constructor(r, g, b) {
    this.values = [r, g, b];
  }
  getRed() {
    return this.values[0];
  }
}

const red = new Color(255, 0, 0);
console.log(red.getRed()); // 255
```

Without methods, you may be tempted to define the function within the constructor:

```js
class Color {
  constructor(r, g, b) {
    this.values = [r, g, b];
    this.getRed = function () {
      return this.values[0];
    };
  }
}
```

This also works. However, a problem is that this creates a new function every time a `Color` instance is created, even when they all do the same thing!

```js
console.log(new Color().getRed === new Color().getRed); // false
```

> Contrarily, if you use a method, it will be shared between all instances. A function can be shared between all instances, but still have its behavior differ when different instances call it, because the value of `this` is different. If you are curious _where_ this method is stored in — it's defined on the prototype of all instances, or `Color.prototype`, which is explained in more detail in [Inheritance and the prototype chain](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Inheritance_and_the_prototype_chain).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, if you use a method, it will be shared between all instances. A function can be shared between all instances, but still have its behavior differ when different instances call it, because the value of `this` is different. If you are curious _where_ this method is stored in — it's defined on the prototype of all instances, or `Color.prototype`, which is explained in more detail in [Inheritance and the prototype chain](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Inheritance_and_the_prototype_chain).
```

Similarly, we can create a new method called `setRed`, which sets the red value of the color.

```js
class Color {
  constructor(r, g, b) {
    this.values = [r, g, b];
  }
  getRed() {
    return this.values[0];
  }
  setRed(value) {
    this.values[0] = value;
  }
}

const red = new Color(255, 0, 0);
red.setRed(0);
console.log(red.getRed()); // 0; of course, it should be called "black" at this stage!
```

## Private fields

You might be wondering: why do we want to go to the trouble of using `getRed` and `setRed` methods, when we can directly access the `values` array on the instance?

```js
class Color {
  constructor(r, g, b) {
    this.values = [r, g, b];
  }
}

const red = new Color(255, 0, 0);
red.values[0] = 0;
console.log(red.values[0]); // 0
```

> There is a philosophy in object-oriented programming called "encapsulation". This means you should not access the underlying the implementation of an object, but use the well-abstracted methods to interact with it. For example, if we suddenly decided to represent colors as [HSL](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/color_value/hsl) instead:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a philosophy in object-oriented programming called "encapsulation". This means you should not access the underlying implementation of an object, but instead use well-abstracted methods to interact with it. For example, if we suddenly decided to represent colors as [HSL](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/color_value/hsl) instead:
```

```js
class Color {
  constructor(r, g, b) {
    // values is now an HSL array!
    this.values = rgbToHSL([r, g, b]);
  }
  getRed() {
    return this.values[0];
  }
  setRed(value) {
    this.values[0] = value;
  }
}

const red = new Color(255, 0, 0);
console.log(red.values[0]); // 0; It's not 255 anymore, because the H value for pure red is 0
```

> The user assumption that `values` means the RGB value suddenly collapses, and it may cause their logic to break. So, if you are an implementor of a class, you would want to hide the internal data structure of your instance from your user, both to keep the API clean and to prevent the user's code from breaking when you do some "harmless refactors". In classes, this is done through [_private fields_](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/Private_class_fields).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
…then the user assumption that `values` means the RGB value will have suddenly collapsed, and it may cause the user’s logic to break. So, if you are an implementor of a class, you would want to hide the internal data structure of your instance from your user, both to keep the API clean and to prevent the user's code from breaking when you do some "harmless refactors". In classes, this is done through [_private fields_](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/Private_class_fields).
```

```js example-bad
console.log(red.#values); // SyntaxError: Private field '#values' must be declared in an enclosing class
```

Private fields in JavaScript are _hard private_: if the class does not implement methods that expose these private fields, there's absolutely no mechanism to retrieve them from outside the class. This means you are safe to do any refactors to your class's private fields, as long as the behavior of exposed methods stay the same.

After we've made the `values` field private, we can add some more logic in the `getRed` and `setRed` methods, instead of making them simple pass-through methods. For example, we can add a check in `setRed` to see if it's a valid R value:

```js
class Color {
  #values;
  constructor(r, g, b) {
    this.#values = [r, g, b];
  }
  getRed() {
    return this.#values[0];
  }
  setRed(value) {
    if (value < 0 || value > 255) {
      throw new RangeError("Invalid R value");
    }
    this.#values[0] = value;
  }
}

const red = new Color(255, 0, 0);
red.setRed(1000); // RangeError: Invalid R value
```

> If we leave the `values` property exposed, our users can easily circumvent that check by assigning to `values[0]` directly, and create invalid colors — but with a well-encapsulated API, we can make our code more robust and prevent logic errors downstream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we leave the `values` property exposed, our users can easily circumvent that check by assigning to `values[0]` directly, and create invalid colors. But with a well-encapsulated API, we can make our code more robust and prevent logic errors downstream.
```

}
console.log(new MyClass().luckyNumber); // 0.5
console.log(new MyClass().luckyNumber); // 0.3
```

Public fields are almost equivalent to assigning a property to `this`. For example, the above example can also be converted to:

```js
class MyClass {
  constructor() {
    this.luckyNumber = Math.random();
  }
}
```

## Static properties

With the `Date` example, we have also encountered the [`Date.now()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/now) method, which returns the current date. This method does not belong to any date instance — it belongs to the class itself. However, it's put on the `Date` class instead of being exposed as a global `DateNow()` function, because it's mostly useful when dealing with date instances.

> **Note:** Prefixing utility methods with what they deal with is called "namespacing" and is considered a good practice. For example, in addition to the older, unprefixed [`parseInt()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/parseInt) method, JavaScript also later added the prefixed [`Number.parseInt()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number/parseInt) method to indicate that it's for dealing with numbers.

> [_Static properties_](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/static) are a group of class features that are defined the class itself, rather than on individual instances of the class. These features include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[_Static properties_](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/static) are a group of class features that are defined on the class itself, rather than on individual instances of the class. These features include:
```

      throw new RangeError("Alpha value must be between 0 and 1");
    }
    this.#values[3] = value;
  }
}
```

There are a few things that have immediately come to attention. First is that in the constructor, we are calling `super(r, g, b)`. It is a language requirement to call [`super()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/super) before accessing `this`. The `super()` call calls the parent class's constructor to initialize `this` — here it's roughly equivalent to `this = new Color(r, g, b)`. You can have code before `super()`, but you cannot access `this` before `super()` — the language prevents you from accessing the uninitialized `this`.

After the parent class is done with modifying `this`, the derived class can do its own logic. Here we added a private field called `#alpha`, and also provided a pair of getter/setters to interact with them.

A derived class inherits all methods from its parent. For example, although `ColorWithAlpha` doesn't declare a `get red()` accessor itself, you can still access `red` because this behavior is specified by the parent class:

```js
const color = new ColorWithAlpha(255, 0, 0, 0.5);
console.log(color.red); // 255
```

> Derived classes can also override methods from the parent class. For example, all classes implicitly inherit from [`Object`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object) class, which defines some basic methods like [`toString()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/toString). However, the base `toString()` method is notoriously useless, because it prints `[object Object]` in most cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Derived classes can also override methods from the parent class. For example, all classes implicitly inherit the [`Object`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object) class, which defines some basic methods like [`toString()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/toString). However, the base `toString()` method is notoriously useless, because it prints `[object Object]` in most cases:
```

```js
console.log(red.toString()); // [object Object]
```

Instead, our class can override it to print the color's RGB values:

```js
class Color {
  // ...
  toString() {
    return this.#values.join(", ");
  }
}

console.log(new Color(255, 0, 0).toString()); // '255, 0, 0'
```

Within derived classes, you can access the parent class's methods by using `super`. This allows you to build enhancement methods and avoid code duplication.

```js
class ColorWithAlpha extends Color {
  // ...
  toString() {
    // Call the parent class's toString() and build on the return value
    return `${super.toString()}, ${this.#alpha}`;
  }
}

console.log(new ColorWithAlpha(255, 0, 0, 0.5).toString()); // '255, 0, 0, 0.5'
```

When you use `extends`, the static methods inherit from each other as well, so you can also override or enhance them.

```js
class ColorWithAlpha extends Color {
  // ...
  isValid(r, g, b, a) {
    // Call the parent class's isValid() and build on the return value
    return super.isValid(r, g, b) && a >= 0 && a <= 1;
  }
}

console.log(ColorWithAlpha.isValid(255, 0, 0, -1)); // false
```

> Derived classes don't have access to the parent class's private fields — this is another key aspect to JavaScript private fields being "hard private". Private fields are scoped to the class body itself and does not grant access to _any_ outside code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Derived classes don't have access to the parent class's private fields — this is another key aspect to JavaScript private fields being "hard private". Private fields are scoped to the class body itself and do not grant access to _any_ outside code.
```

```js
class ColorWithAlpha extends Color {
  log() {
    console.log(this.#values); // SyntaxError: Private field '#values' must be declared in an enclosing class
  }
}
```

A class can only extend from one class. This prevents problems in multiple inheritance like the [diamond problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_inheritance#The_diamond_problem). However, due to the dynamic nature of JavaScript, it's still possible to achieve the effect of multiple inheritance through class composition and [mixins](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes#mix-ins).

Instances of derived classes are also [instances of](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/instanceof) the base class.

```js
const color = new ColorWithAlpha(255, 0, 0, 0.5);
console.log(color instanceof Color); // true
console.log(color instanceof ColorWithAlpha); // true
```

## Why classes?

The guide has been pragmatic so far: we are focusing on _how_ classes can be used, but there's one question unanswered: _why_ would one use a class? The answer is: it depends.

> Classes introduce a _paradigm_, or a way to organize your code. Classes lay the fundaments to object-oriented programming, which is built on concepts like [inheritance](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inheritance_(object-oriented_programming)>) and [polymorphism](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymorphism_(computer_science)>) (especially _subtype polymorphism_). However, many people are philosophically against certain OOP practices and don't use classes as a result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Classes introduce a _paradigm_, or a way to organize your code. Classes are the foundations of object-oriented programming, which is built on concepts like [inheritance](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inheritance_(object-oriented_programming)>) and [polymorphism](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymorphism_(computer_science)>) (especially _subtype polymorphism_). However, many people are philosophically against certain OOP practices and don't use classes as a result.
```

> For example, one thing that makes `Date` objects infamous is that it's _mutable_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, one thing that makes `Date` objects infamous is that they’re _mutable_.
```

```js
function incrementDay(date) {
  return date.setDate(date.getDate() + 1);
}
const date = new Date(); // 2019-06-19
const newDay = incrementDay(date);
console.log(newDay); // 2019-06-20
// The old date is modified as well!?
console.log(date); // 2019-06-20
```

> Mutability and internal state is an important aspect of object-oriented programming, but it often makes code hard to reason with, because any seemingly innocent operation may have unexpected side-effects and change the behavior in other parts of the program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mutability and internal state are important aspects of object-oriented programming, but often make code hard to reason with — because any seemingly innocent operation may have unexpected side effects and change the behavior in other parts of the program.
```

In order to reuse code, we usually resort to extending classes, which can create big hierarchies of inheritance patterns.

![A typical OOP inheritance tree, with five classes and three levels](figure8.1.png)

However, it is often hard to describe inheritance cleanly when one class can only extend one other class. Often, we want the behavior of multiple classes. In Java, this is done through interfaces; in JavaScript, it can be done through mixins. But at the end of the day, it's still not very convenient.

On the brighter side, classes are a very powerful way to organize our code on a higher level. For example, without the `Color` class, we may need to create a dozen of utility functions:

```js
function isRed(color) {
  return color.red === 255;
}
function isValidColor(color) {
  return (
    color.red >= 0 &&
    color.red <= 255 &&
    color.green >= 0 &&
    color.green <= 255 &&
    color.blue >= 0 &&
    color.blue <= 255
  );
}
// ...
```

But with classes, we can congregate them all under the `Color` namespace, which improves readability. In addition, the introduction of private fields allows us to hide certain data from downstream users, creating a clean API.

> In general, you should consider using classes when you want to create objects that stores their own internal data and expose a lot of behavior. Take built-in JS classes as examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, you should consider using classes when you want to create objects that store their own internal data and expose a lot of behavior. Take built-in JavaScript classes as examples:
```

- The [`Map`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Map) and [`Set`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set) classes store a collection of elements and allow you to access them by key using `get()`, `set()`, `has()`, etc.

> - The [`Date`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date) class stores a date as a Unix timestamp (a number) and allow you to format, update, and read individual date components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [`Date`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date) class stores a date as a Unix timestamp (a number) and allows you to format, update, and read individual date components.
```

> - The [`Error`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Error) class stores information about a particular exception, including error message, stack trace, cause, etc. It's one of the few classes that come with a rich inheritance structure: there are multiple built-in classes like [`TypeError`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/TypeError) and [`ReferenceError`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/ReferenceError) that extend `Error`. In the case of errors, this inheritance allows refining the semantics of errors: each error class represents a specific type of error, which can be easily checked with [`instanceof`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/instanceof).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [`Error`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Error) class stores information about a particular exception, including an error message, stack trace, cause, etc. It's one of the few classes that come with a rich inheritance structure: there are multiple built-in classes like [`TypeError`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/TypeError) and [`ReferenceError`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/ReferenceError) that extend `Error`. In the case of errors, this inheritance allows refining the semantics of errors: each error class represents a specific type of error, which can be easily checked with [`instanceof`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/instanceof).
```

---
title: Using classes
slug: Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_Classes
tags:
  - Guide
  - Intermediate
  - JavaScript
  - Object
---
{{jsSidebar("JavaScript Guide")}} {{PreviousNext("Web/JavaScript/Guide/Working_with_Objects", "Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_promises")}}

> JavaScript is a prototype-based language — object behaviors are specified by its own properties and its prototype's. However, with the addition of [classes](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes), the creation of hierarchies of objects and the inheritance of properties and their values are much more in line with other object-oriented languages like Java. In this section, we will demonstrate how objects can be created from classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JavaScript is a prototype-based language — an object’s behaviors are specified by its own properties and its prototype's properties. However, with the addition of [classes](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes), the creation of hierarchies of objects and the inheritance of properties and their values are much more in line with other object-oriented languages such as Java. In this section, we will demonstrate how objects can be created from classes.
```

> JavaScript is a prototype-based language — object behaviors are specified by its own properties and its prototype's. However, with the addition of [classes](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes), the creation of hierarchies of objects and the inheritance of properties and their values are much more in line with other object-oriented languages like Java. In this section, we will demonstrate how objects can be created from classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JavaScript is a prototype-based language — an object’s behaviors are specified by its own properties and its prototype's properties. However, with the addition of [classes](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes), the creation of hierarchies of objects and the inheritance of properties and their values are much more in line with other object-oriented languages such as Java. In this section, we will demonstrate how objects can be created from classes.
```

In many other languages, _classes_, or constructors, are clearly distinguished from _objects_, or instances. In JavaScript, classes are mainly an abstraction over the existing prototypical inheritance mechanism — all patterns are convertible to prototype-based inheritance. Classes themselves are normal JavaScript values as well, and have their own prototype chains. In fact, most plain JavaScript functions can be used as constructors — you use the `new` operator with a constructor function to create a new object.

We will be playing with the well-abstracted class model in this tutorial, and discuss what semantics classes offer. If you want to dive deep into the underlying prototype system, you can read the [Inheritance and the prototype chain](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Inheritance_and_the_prototype_chain) guide.

This chapter assumes that you are already somewhat familiar with JavaScript and that you have used ordinary objects.

## Overview of classes

> If you have some hands-on experience with JavaScript, or have followed the guide along, you probably have already used classes, even if you haven't created one. For example, this [may seem familiar to you](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Numbers_and_dates):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have some hands-on experience with JavaScript, or have followed along with the guide, you probably have already used classes, even if you haven't created one. For example, this [may seem familiar to you](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Numbers_and_dates):
```

Similar to functions, class declarations also have their expression counterparts.

```js
const MyClass = class {
  // Class body...
};
```

Class expressions can have names as well. The expression's name is only visible to the class's body.

```js
const MyClass = class MyClassLongerName {
  // Class body. Here MyClass and MyClassLongerName point to the same class.
};
new MyClassLongerName(); // ReferenceError: MyClassLongerName is not defined
```

## Constructor

Perhaps the most important job of a class is to act as a "factory" for objects. For example, when we use the `Date` constructor, we expect it to give a new object which represents the date data we passed in — which we can then manipulate with other methods the instance exposes. In classes, the instance creation is done by the [constructor](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/constructor).

As an example, we would create a class called `Color`, which represents a specific color. Users create colors through passing in an [RGB](/en-US/docs/Glossary/RGB) triplet.

```js
class Color {
  constructor(r, g, b) {
    // Assign the RGB values as a property of `this`.
    this.values = [r, g, b];
  }
}
```

> Open your browser's DevTools, paste the above code into the console, and then create an instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open your browser's devtools, paste the above code into the console, and then create an instance:
```
